OK so that was a brief interview with Karl stack.
Now I'd like to show you in the Chrome dev tools how you can actually take a look at the representation
of the call stack and step through it.
One call at a time.
So let's do it.
I have some simple code here a function called Make rant that I'm calling twice and passing in a string.
The rand text and then a place to append a new H1.
What it does is it makes new empty H1.
Then it sets the inter text to the result of a function called Get rant text get ranch.
Text is going to call two different functions The first one is Scream which uppercase is it and add
some exclamation points.
Then another function I call repeat.
Yes there is a built in string repeat these days but for this example I'm not using it.
I wanted a couple other functions on the stack so then it calls repeat which takes that scream.
The uppercase version of whatever we pass in so let's say we started with go away.
That's our phrase we pass in it's going to call Scream which will give us go away with three exclamation
points.
And then if I call repeats which I am here get rant text repeats it eight times.
We end up with a string that looks like this.
Eight of those.
Then we take that and create a H1 which we actually already created.
We add that as the inter text and appended to whatever element we pass in.
So it's just a dumb demo.
It's not something you probably would do but this is what we end up with over here.
I have two H ones I hate man is very true I hate men so much.
Oh my gosh I just I feel queasy even just writing the word let alone seeing it eight times here.
That's coming from make rants.
I just passing this string and a place to append the new element and then here's a second one if you
have to cough please cover your mouth.
It's also being appended here.
Let's take a look at just one.
So it will make it a little easier when we step through the call stack.
So going to open up the Chrome dev tools and go to the sources tab and in the sources tab and pretend
that was closed.
If we open up this navigator on the left side for me go to our file with the code.
So app J.S. is the name of my file whatever you named yours.
What we do is add in a breakpoint on the left.
I can actually click.
So if I click in here I can make some changes and play around with them but if I click on the number
to the left of one of those function calls it will actually insert a breakpoint it will pause execution
of our code when it encounters this.
So all of this code will run first.
If I were to add in a console that log console dialog hello and refresh the page.
While I'm an idiot it goes away.
Of course I just said that I do a console that log here Hello this will run first before we encounter
that breakpoint.
If I look at my console we get Hello.
Notice though I don't see anything over here.
It says paused in debugger and I have this little alert over here that says paused on breakpoint.
So because I clicked there it paused.
If I click and refresh it doesn't pause anymore but if I click and I refresh the page there we go OK.
So let's see what we can do.
On the left side we have a tab or a piece called call stack.
This is where we'll see a representation of the call stack.
And if we just walk through this first on our own we'll zoom in a bit and can as you mean okay I'll
close the sidebar make rant is going to be called.
There's no function calls aside from make Rand so far.
So make Rand will be added to the call stack then make rant itself calls the document does create element
is a built in function or method that won't appear on the call stack really.
But our first function we defined is get rant text so get rant text is over here that calls scream so
scream or run and return something.
Then we get to rant and that's returned.
We have text then repeat is called.
With that value.
So repeat is going to run.
So let's just play around with it.
I'm going to click over here on this.
There's also a shortcut but to make it easier for you to see when I'm actually advancing I'll just click.
So keep your eye here where it says Call Stack okay.
So make Rand was added to the call stack.
It's not done executing otherwise who would be off.
And it can't be done it has to do some other stuff first.
So the first thing it did was evaluate this document that create element.
Then we get to this line get Rand to text.
So you'll see get rant text is now added to the call stack.
And if I look at any of these at any point if I click it make click on make rants you can see it's kind
of hard to show here.
But this is the information the values that are in current in this scope of make rant so phrase is set
to I hate managed.
That's the argument we passed in.
We also have element which is the body which I passed in down here and now this H1 variable is this
H1 element that we created with document that create element.
So then instead of get rant text we have a variable text but it's not set to anything yet.
If I move forward again we'll see scream added to the top of the call stack there it is.
So make rent started but it's not done it can't finish.
Intel get rent tax comes back that can't finish.
Intel scream comes back we're in scream right now scream does not call any other functions aside from
returning string to uppercase.
So you'll see if I advance again.
Scream is up top advance and it's gone.
Scream has been removed.
It finished executing in a return to value which we now have here.
Text has value.
I hate Manet's all uppercase with three exclamation points that came from scream then next line rant.
The variable let rant equals repeat of text.
This is text that variable so repeat this eight times so repeat is going to be added.
That's our next function.
You'll see it added to the stack.
There it is.
So get ran text is still waiting.
Make rent is still waiting on get ran text which is waiting on repeat so repeat is then going to loop.
I'll skip through this so we have results which is completely built at this point.
The loop is over.
We're now at.
Return result.
So.
Result is I hate Manet's uppercase exclamation points repeated eight times in a single string that is
returned to the contents of the function don't really matter.
In these examples I just want you to pay attention to the call stack itself.
Watchmen things are added in when they're removed so return results repeat should be removed.
And there we go.
So now get rant text has all those function calls it has return values from them it's done and it's
ready if it's not done yet but it's ready to return rant so it waited first to get scream then scream
came back and it waited to get repeat then repeat return to value.
So now it can return that value so it's going to return and get rant techs will be removed.
Here it goes.
Goodbye.
Now we're back in make ranch.
The original function call that has been waiting patiently this whole time.
You can kind of see wherever it's going with this.
Where are you.
This idea here of a finger in a book to keep track of where you are.
It's kind of the same idea maybe.
I don't know if that's a good analogy or not but it's it's kind of the same idea.
This function was originally added to the stack a while ago but it couldn't finish until a bunch of
other function calls ran.
And this is a simple example.
Often you end up with some functions that have a whole bunch of function calls which call other functions
and then recursion is a whole other issue but you're not going to get into at this point but just know
that this is a simple demo.
Most of the time your apps are going to have many more functions on the call stack at any given point
or they could at least so make grants is now ready to append element that append child there is no return
statement and make rent.
So there we go we get to the last line it's showing me this here.
So make rent will be removed from the calls deck and because this element that append child H1 ran.
We now have the text showing up our new element on the screen so I'll step through it and it's gone.
It's completely off the call stack which means that this function call here is done in it finished.
That was the original starting point.
Now the interpreter has moved on to this line and there's nothing after it.
It's just done.
And there we go.
We made it through so that is how you can use the dev tools to step through step by step.
Each function call on the call stack and see what's going on.
And this can be useful if things are just behaving very oddly.
It's also a nice way.
If you had a breakpoint somewhere for you to just take a look at the Values at any given point play
around with the variables in there see see what's going on.
Diagnose your problems.
The main reason I brought it up here was just to make it clear how the call stack works.
This idea of the latest function called to be added to the stack that function call it will be the first
to be removed and you end up with this pile up of functions that are function calls that maybe are waiting
on a bunch of other function calls to finish which themselves might be waiting and other function calls
and eventually one of them has to finish in return something to that sort of a reverse cascade can happen.
The functions that were waiting will hopefully return which continues all the way down to our original
function call which was make rant so why are we talking about this.
Why do you need to know about it.
Well it's going to help explain and help you understand how a synchronous code works in JavaScript which
is what we're going to tackle right now.
Well next video right after this.